---
layout: post
title: "picking programs to apply for"
parent: "applying for grad school"
---

Picking what PhD programs to apply for is an incredibly personal process. I think one of the most important parts is continuously talking with people who know you like research advisors, friends, and family members. All of these people can help you figure out what you want your life to look like _after_ your PhD, and how you want your PhD to get you there. My goal for this section is to share my own experience to help you figure out where to start, not provide a start-to-finish guide.

### factors to consider

Here are some factors that are important to consider when making your list:

- **What type of research do you want to do?** This is the most obvious one, and I'll talk more about narrowing down your research interests later.
- **What type of research environment do you want?** Your research group is a pretty big deal for the next six years. Do you want a big group with lots of other grad students and postdocs, or a smaller and more intimate group? Do you want a more hands-on or hands-off PI (you can often tell by their age---younger PIs will typically be more hands-on)? What other group aspects are important to you---availability of research collaborations, a group with high-impact research, gender or racial diversity? For many fields, it's a good idea to look into schools where you could see yourself working with multiple groups in case one doesn't work out (although I felt strongly that I knew exactly what I wanted in a research group and disregarded that advice, which worked out for me).
- **What are your career goals post-PhD?** Do you want to stay in academia, work in a national lab, go into industry? You don't want to spend six years getting a PhD with the intention of pursuing a certain career then realize your PhD didn't actually set you up to be a competitive job applicant. Professors you identify as mentors will be the best people to help you understand which programs and research groups will best set you up for your career goals.
- **What schools are you competitive for?** There is no such beast as a "safety school" when you are applying to PhDs. But, there are some schools you will be more competitive for than others based on your GPA, research experience, and recommendation letters. My advice is to bring a list of a few schools you are interested in to a research advisor or trusted academic advisor and ask them to be brutally honest about if you are competitive for those types of schools. If they say no that doesn't mean that you can't apply for those schools! But you might want to add some safer schools. If your advisor indicates that you may not be competitive for any schools that you would be _genuinely excited to attend_, then it could be good to look into post-bacc or master's options for a gap year. On the flip side, don't let imposter syndrome get the best of you. Imposter syndrome will sometimes try to keep you from applying to schools that you do legitimately have a shot at and you can't let the little demon on your shoulder win.
- **Where do you want to live for the next 4-6 years?** You're going to spend the better part of a decade at this school. It's not cheap at _all_ to throw out some schools based on location. Proximity to family, weather, and rural vs urban environment may all be important to you.

### narrowing down research interests and picking research groups

Everyone I know approached this differently. Here are a few random tidbits I learned from my own journey:

- **If you like the research you're doing now, don't try to fix what ain't broken.** If the idea of continuing the research you're doing now excites you, start there! Ask your current PI to recommend groups at other universities doing similar research, and look into groups that have authored papers in your field.
- **Google Scholar is your friend.** Most professors don't routinely update their group website, so it's folly to assume that all the research directions stated on there are up-to-date. Their google scholar page will be far more helpful in figuring out what type of studies they are publishing now. Sort publications by date to find the most recent ones. From a PI's google scholar, you can also figure out how often their grad students are publishing first author papers. If you want to go into academia, you usually want a PI who will encourage you to publish a few papers during your PhD so you can gain independence and build your own reputation as a researcher. From a google scholar you can also figure out who PIs often collaborate with, so if you like one research group you can look into their collaborators too.
- **Don't be afraid to read read read papers.** Especially if you want to switch fields, you just gotta put your head down and read some papers. For me, I did a literature review when applying to the Churchill Scholarship in the summer so I could write a proposal in a new field. I realized that I really liked learning about this new field, and ended up applying to PhD programs in it. Having that background from my literature review gave me a bit of a grasp on the field so I could find advisors I wanted to apply to within the field. Every one of my friends had a different experience; for example, another friend of mine just kept reading and reading and reading papers from different research groups until he decided he really enjoyed learning about neutron stars and wanted to apply to neutron star groups. Once you have an idea of a research area, you can start just reading abstracts on professors' google scholars. If you want to continue research similar to what you do now, you might skip straight to reading abstracts.
- **Don't procrastinate on other application tasks by reading papers.** It's important to read papers, but you're not going to become an expert in a field from a few weeks of reading papers. Also, if you're anything like me you're going to tell yourself you want to read five papers in the next week before doing anything else and then it will be a month later and you've only read two. Don't put off writing applications or emailing professors because you don't think you know enough about their field. Spoken from experience, that mindset will only bring stress and delay your timeline.
- **Look up the career trajectories of previous grad students and postdocs in groups of interest.** A good way to figure out if a group will set you up well for your goals following your PhD is to figure out where previous grad students and postdocs from that group have gone after graduating. Many groups have lists of previous students on their website, and you can look them up on LinkedIn. If you want to stay in academia then it's particularly interesting to see what their postdocs have done, since most people take a postdoc with the intention of later applying for professorships.
- **Look up universities in locations you like, and see if any professors there interest you.** Like I said, factoring location into your PhD search isn't cheap. If you really want to live in NC, look up professors at nearby universities. If you have a partner moving somewhere else following graduation, look for universities in their area. None of these _have_ to factor into your list, but you also don't have to define your next six years completely on research interests.
