---
layout: post
title: "curriculum vitae"
parent: "applying for grad school"
---

A CV is distinct from a resume in several ways:

- Your CV can (and likely should) be longer than one page.
- Parts of your CV may just be boring lists. For undergrads, that may be a section listing all the presentations you have given.
- While a resume often only includes tailored experiences for a specific job, your CV is far more comprehensive. Include all the research-related experiences you’ve had in undergrad, all the jobs you’ve had, all of the extracurriculars you’ve been involved in, etc.

[Here](https://career.ucsb.edu/sites/default/files/docs/CV%20(Grad-STEM-2).pdf) is the example CV that I use to help me format. I prefer to have horizontal lines between all of my sections because I think it makes for a cleaner look. I have also used AI to help me format my CV in the past and it's pretty helpful.

Yall, CV envy is so real. There's a fine line between looking up the LinkedIns of grad students in PhD programs you want to attend to figure out if you are a competitive candidate, and obsessing over the LinkedIns of successful applicants to figure out how many of them have Goldwater Scholarships and whether you're doomed because you don't have one. Not that I've done that or anything. My point is, I wish I was more intentional during application season about approaching my CV from a gentle point of view and avoiding frantic comparison. By the time you are applying to grad school, there is very little you can do to add substantially to your CV; instead, it's best to focus your energy on how to take what you _did_ accomplish in undergrad and turn it into your best possible application package.

# general guidelines

- With very few exceptions, you should only put information on your CV that you want the application committee to focus on. Low GPA? Don’t put it in your CV. You like your major GPA but not overall GPA? Put that!
- Generally you want “Education” at the top of your CV followed by “Research Experience,” but after those two sections your structure is very flexible. You are free to put your strongest sections next. For example, I put my “Presentations” and “Publications” sections right after “Research Experience” because I had a lot of conference presentations, but put “Honors” lower down because that section wasn’t super beefy when I was applying.
- My opinion: You don’t want your CV to feel like fluff, but it’s also important to think outside the box when figuring out what to put on your CV. If there’s something you did in undergrad that doesn’t fit into a traditional CV section but you think makes you a stronger applicant, there’s often a way to work it into your CV.
- I was told to not include anything from high school except…
  - Honors/Awards
  - Research experience that led to publication

# sections

There are many possible sections you might have that I don’t list here! I'll keep the explanations pretty minimal, and I refer you to the example I linked above for a reference.

### header

Nothing too fancy, just make it look professional! I've seen some people include a "research interests" statement (2-3 sentences max) at the top of their CVs, although I chose not to.

### education

Only put your GPA if it will help you!

### research experience

If you did multiple projects under a single research group, it can be helpful to make that clear by having sub-headings within a research experience.

Instead of putting a “skills” section at the end of your CV, you could include a line or two after each research experience item listing the skills that you used in that experience. I have a friend who formats her CV like that and I think it looks really nice.

If you think it would strengthen your CV, you can include semester projects like PHYS 332 or PHYS 482L. You could also include a section directly below “Research Experience” called “Semester Projects” or something similar.

### publications

Use bibliography format to cite papers on which you are an author.

At this stage in your career, it’s good to list any papers that you are an author on which…
- Are in the works but not yet submitted. _"Manuscript in Preparation"_ or _"Research in Preparation"_
- Have been submitted but not yet accepted. _"Submitted Manuscript"_
- Have been accepted (include the journal name!). _"Accepted"_
I distinguish between my unpublished and published publications by italicizing unpublished papers.

If you have non-peer reviewed publications, including articles in science outreach magazines, internal research group reports (eg. for a PHYS 395), etc., you can include a subsection(s) for those.

It’s common to bold your name in the author list to make it clear where you are. Readers will care about author order because the closer to first author you are, the more influence you had on the paper.

### presentations

Again, bibliography format is typical. As an undergrad it’s okay to list conferences that you have been accepted into as a presenter but have not yet attended.

This section can include a lot of diverse types of presentations, and it's okay to break it into subsections. If you feel like you don’t have many presentations to put on your CV, think past just formal conference presentations. Some presentations you can include as an undergrad are…
- Poster presentations
- Research talks at conferences or universities
- Concluding presentations at a summer program
- Outreach presentations
- Chalk talks at SPS meetings
- MakerFest Exhibits
- And more…

I have a fair number of poster presentations on my CV, so I bold the conferences that I want people to notice. For me that's SESAPS, CU*iP, and APS, then I leave UNC poster sessions and REU final presentations unbolded. For you it might not be presentations that you want to selectively bold, but it's a neat technique you can use for any line on your CV you want to draw attention to.

### honors

Honors/awards can range from research awards to scholarships to Dean’s List, and may tastefully include awards from high school. Fellowships or scholarships can include the dollar amount. Some honors sections may be stronger if you include a short description of each, if it's otherwise unclear from the award title.

### leadership experience

I have two sections that fall into this category: one for physics leadership ("professional leadership and service"), and one for extracurricular leadership ("community leadership and service") which I put at the end. I’ve seen people combine them but I felt this was clearer for my CV. This section can include SPS/ViP leadership, mentorship programs, etc. My "community" section includes volunteer work (eg. four years as a Musical Empowerment teacher), ensemble membership from my music major, and club leadership (eg. a year as a small group leader in my old dance company).

### teaching experience

Teaching, grading, mentoring, ULA, etc. If you’ve had extensive teaching experience, this can go close to the top!

### professional membership

If you have been part of SPS, VIP, and/or any other academic society during your undergrad and want to include that on your CV, you can include a small section called “Professional Membership” or “Affiliations” where you list that. Unless you were on the board for any of them, it’s probably best to just keep them each one line.

### conferences

If you've attended any conferences during undergrad, you can include a list on your CV at this stage in your career. A "conferences" section is particularly relevant if you attended conferences that you didn't present at, because those don't show up in your "presentations" section. Attending a conference shows that you are interested in joining the academic conversation, and demonstrates initiative because conference attendance is often something you have to seek out explicitly as an undergrad. Like professional membership, it's best to keep each conference item to one line because the reader knows what attending a conference entails. If you feel as though attending conferences has had a big impact on your PhD goals, that's something good to expand on in your statement of purpose.

### skills

I like the way the "skills" section is formatted on the template I linked at the top of this page, where the skills are broken up by categories like "data analysis and programming." Don’t forget skills you learned from classes like PHYS 332, Electronics, PHYS 482L, etc! Lots of physics majors across the country don't have as many skills-based classes as we do, so these are skills that not everyone will have on their CV.

An alternative to a "skills" section that I’ve seen people do and really like is to include a line at the bottom of each item in their “research experience” section for the skills that they used in that research experience, rather than just dumping all their skills in a section towards the bottom of their CV. 

### advanced coursework

If you have completed grad classes or specialized classes that you think would strengthen your application, you can include a separate section for "advanced coursework" or add an additional line in your "education" section. I stuck pretty close to the standard physics major track so I didn't include this section for my grad school applications, but lots of math majors I know in particular have some cool unique grad classes that would look great on an undergrad CV.

### job experience

This can be a place to list jobs you’ve had in undergrad that don’t fit into any of the other categories.


