---
title: summer research
author: Anya Frazer
date: 2026-06-25
category: Jekyll
layout: post
---

Hello and welcome to my page about summer research! There are _so many_ diverse ways to spend your summer doing research as a physics undergrad and I plan to go over some here.

A bit of background about my own summer research journey: I spent all three of my undergraduate summers doing NSF-funded research projects at three different universities. This means that the NSF (National Science Foundation) paid for my rent and travel to these universities and gave me a sizable stipend to do research over the summer! My first and last summer I did REUs (Research Experiences for Undergraduates) at Vanderbilt University and Penn State University respectively, and the summer after my sophomore year I did a PIRE (Partnership for International Research and Education) at Yamagata University in Yamagata City, Japan. I hope that this guide will give you some insight on how you can apply for career-opening opportunities like this too!

As an additional resource, I'd like to share a [summer research opportunities document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gY2LRExqct45rWbPK-ibcz2qokDdoDqKtyUv5meeHdg/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.u3oq6bo1mske) that a few SPS members started a couple years ago. This document crowdsources information on summer research programs that UNC physics students have taken part in so that future students can find more opportunities. If you have done a cool research program that isn't on the list, we'd love you to add it as well!


# part i: what summer research opportunities should I apply for?

In this section, I'm going to go over types of summer research opportunities that are great for students who are considering getting a PhD following undergrad. This is the boat I was in, so I'm sticking to what I know :) If your goal after undergrad is to end up in industry, pre-college education, or something else, I encourage you to speak with the career center, professors, and other students who have followed this path.

I've heard over and over from students who feel money is a barrier to doing research over the summer. Part of my goal with this guide is to show the many ways you can do research over the summer and _get paid_, sometimes more than you would have otherwise. There is always uncertainty and I don't have a magic wand to make sure everyone magically gets paid for their summer research. However, I want to show that getting a research job as an undergraduate is a very real and attainable possibility.

### types of summer research opportunities

1. **Part-time job + unpaid summer research at UNC.** There are an abundancy of research groups at UNC that will be happy to host an unpaid summer undergraduate researcher. SPS and ViP usually have meetings towards the beginning of each semester guiding undergrads on how to get involved in research at UNC. It's as easy as emailing professors of interest and requesting to meet to talk about their research. Once you're in a research group, they are almost certain to at least support you to do 20 hours of unpaid research over the summer, which you can easily supplement with a part-time job.

2. **Paid summer research at UNC.** There are a few ways to get paid for doing research at UNC over the summer. Some research advisors have funding to pay undergrads over the summer. Ask your research advisor (respectfully, and understanding the answer may be no) if they can pay you! It can feel uncomfortable, but most professors understand the financial burden of unpaid research and really want to pay their undergrads if they can. Some professors are more likely to have funding allocated to undergraduates than others; if getting paid for your research is make-or-break for you, talk to upperclassmen to see which of them have been paid over the summer. Additionally, most research advisors will support you to apply for a [SURF](https://our.unc.edu/fund/surf/) at UNC, which pays a $4000 summer stipend for you to do 20 hours of research per week. A SURF application requires you to write a research proposal, which your research advisor should be able to help you talk through ideas for and edit. Bonus, winning a SURF fellowship looks great on your CV and gets you experience writing proposals!

4. **Paid research outside of UNC.** There are plenty of paid research opportunities outside of UNC, like the ones I did. When you hear people say they are "applying for REUs," they usually mean that they are applying for a combination of REUs and other similar research opportunities. Some good ones to look into include DOE SULI, NIST SURF, DAAD RISE, NSF PIRE, NSF IRES, and plent of others. These require more involved applications including essays, letters of recommendation, and a CV. Doing research at a university other than UNC is a great way to professional connections. Schools love having REU students back as grad students!

5. **And so many more**. Talk to other students and research advisors about other ways to do summer research. Maybe that's through an industry internship, the Phillips Ambassadors program at UNC, or something else. The world is your oyster!

### understanding how summer research fits into your career goals

If your goal is to apply for PhD programs, it's a great idea to spend as many undergrad summers as you can doing research. That's my personal opinion---there are of course lots of routes to grad school! It's a lot harder to commit to a significant research project during the school year as an undergraduate because of all of your class commitments, so summer is an excellent time to develop the long-term research skills that will prepare you to be a successful grad student.

As you can see in the section above, there are many _many_ ways to fill multiple summers of research. The way you choose to do so depends entirely on your personal goals. For example, my goal coming into undergrad was to get many diverse materials science research experiences while still making each experience in-depth and meaningful---that exploration was very important for me personally. I therefore applied for REUs all three summers of undergrad and each of them was an invaluable experience. On the other hand, I have many friends who joined a research group at their home universities in their freshman or sophomore year and spent their summers working in that group, then did an REU or SULI the summer after their junior year. From my experience, both options are equally competitive for grad schools, but they fulfill very different personal career goals. Alternatively, many people stay in one lab at their home university for their entire undergrad and excel there; once again, a very different and valuable path. If you choose to stay at UNC for a summer, it's definitely worth it to apply for a SURF!

# part ii: how can I put together a strong REU, PIRE, SULI, or other summer research application?

In this section, I'd like to share some of the application details that got me into my own summer research programs. Positions like REUs and SULIs are highly competitive, and there's no surefire way of putting together an application that will get you into one. That said, here are some tips that I think will make you a strong applicant.

### identifying programs to apply for

There are many places to look for summer research programs. For starters, the physics majors canvas page will often list a few REUs per year. I think those are a great place to start because programs that reach out to the UNC physics department are likely to accept students from R1 universities. From there, I would start looking through:

- [NSF ETAP](https://etap.nsf.gov/) website: an application portal that many REUs or other NSF programs choose to use
- [List of REUs](https://www.nsf.gov/funding/initiatives/reu/search) on NSF website: counterintuitively, this isn't actually the most up-to-date site but it does list a lot of REUs
- Google! Search for specific topics or sub-topics, or search for specific schools, or anything else you would like.

My goal for the summer after my sophomore year was to do research abroad, so I did a lot of googling to find different international programs. For example, [here](https://physics.stanford.edu/undergraduate/undergraduate-research/research-opportunities-outside-stanford) is a great Stanford list of international programs that I found very useful.

When applying to summer programs, I was very intentional about finding out what types of students different programs accepted and targeting programs I felt I was competitive for. Not every program looks for the same type of student. For example, many REUs (but not all, and not to the same extent) aim to support students who don't have access to certain types of research at their home universities or who are underrepresented minorities in their field. I have found lots of success from REUs gaining materials science research experience that I could not have gotten at UNC and connecting with other gender minorities in research. Programs like DOE SULIs, on the other hand, often look for the more traditionally experienced student who has enough research experience to be immediately more productive in the lab. Understanding the goals of different programs will help you both come up with a good list and tailor your applications to fit their search. Some questions to consider include:

- Does the program typically accept students in your year/with your amount of experience?
- Does the program typically accept students from R1 universities like UNC?
- Does the program state a focus on certain demographics? For example, some REUs I applied to clearly made an effort to promote women in physics which led to some great experiences in female-dominated spaces that I wouldn't otherwise have had. But, they might not be the right program to apply to if you don't fit the demographic.

Identifying programs that I was competitive for was particularly important during my freshman year. I only applied to programs that stated explicitly that they accepted freshman or that showed on their website that they had accepted freshman in the past.

### cv

Instead of resumes, academic jobs use CVs. For me, applying for summer research was the first time I had to put together a CV. While a resume includes tailored experiences for a specific job, your CV is far more comprehensive. [Here](https://career.ucsb.edu/sites/default/files/docs/CV%20(Grad-STEM-2).pdf) is a great example of how to format a CV as a student. The example CV is for a grad student, yours won't have nearly as much research-related experience when applying to summer research. For reference, [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1QwTIx_rZVQd2f6kmXZvlT7YcOplX67wd/view?usp=drive_link) is the CV I used when applying to summer programs during my freshman year. The formatting on the grad student example is much nicer; aim for that. 

I share my freshman CV to show the types of items you can include on a CV if you haven't been involved in research yet. For example, I listed a citizen science project and a cool high school project I did. You could also include a job at the planetarium, tutoring, leading a STEM club, science olympiad, etc. Be creative! And at this point in your career, I think it's important to include unrelated job experience like retail or food service at the end of your CV too---it shows you are motivated and confident in a work environment. After freshman year, I started adding activities from my music major as well (ensembles, recitals, etc.) which I don't think hurts either.

For my summer research applications, I always put a list of relevant courses I had taken/was currently taking. Over the years my formatting became a bit cleaner :) Particularly if you are a freshman or sophomore, I think listing your coursework is a way to show that you are far enough along in the major to produce some good research. That's purely anecdotal though.

### essays

Summer research essays are a very different beast from college essays. Your essays are your space to show the reader that you have the qualities needed to excel in a 10-week research project. That can include creativity, organization, self-motivation, etc. You can show this through discussion of previous research, class or personal projects, jobs, or other experiences.

Every program will have a slightly different essay prompt, but I found that I could normally keep the same core essay and swap out certain sections for different programs. In my opinion, these are some crucial elements that you should include in your essay:

- **Your research/class/job/personal project experience, and why that experience means you will be an excellent summer researcher**. Your essay should paint a specific narrative of who you are as a student/researcher. This narrative should both lead into _why_ you want to do this REU, as well as explain what qualities you have that make you prepared for a 10-week research project.
- **Specific research groups you are interested in**. Almost all REUs will have a list of professors with possible research projects for an REU student on their website. These are there for a reason. The REUs want to see that you have done your research into their program, and are applying to specific professors for a reason. It's especially helpful to connect your interest in these groups to the experiences/narrative you already talked about. Many programs will then send your application to the professors that you listed on your essay, and then those professors will choose who they want to admit---I know this was the case for my Vanderbilt and Penn State REUs.
- **Explanation of why this REU will fit into your career goals**. A professor generally doesn't decide to take an REU student because they want you to get a lot of research done; training an REU student requires a lot of investment from a research group and 10 weeks isn't a lot of time to get significant research output! Instead, professors often target students that have specific career goals that will motivate them to use the REU as a launching pad to a bigger career. In other words, professors want to help motivated students build careers. In particular, if you want a PhD, say that! Many REU-type programs are specifically targeted to help students prepare for grad school. I also used this space to say that UNC didn't have the materials science research that I could get at each REU.

These elements do not have to be in this order; in my essays I typically broke up the first bullet into two different sections.

Below I have shared the three essays that got me into the REUs I attended. All three are from very different stages of my career, and show how to write an essay with different levels of research experience. I don't share these essays to say they are perfect; in fact, reading these now that I am several years further into my career strikes me how _un_-perfect they all are. I note any glaring issues at the bottom of each essay. However, I think they are a great example of where summer programs expect you to be in your career, and I also make notes at the bottom of each essay on why I think the essay _did_ work.

I had a habit during undergrad of using exclamation points in my application essays. Clearly it didn't stop me from getting into programs, but I really don't encourage anyone else to be so enthusiastically exclamation point-y in their essays... :)


**Vanderbilt University (summer after freshman year):**

> As a physics and music double major, I would be incredibly grateful to apply my studies towards sustainable energy research with the VINSE REU program. My studies in physics and music have given me an appreciation of applications of physics, such as musical acoustics – last year, I completed a yearlong research project on the correlation between musician practice habits and flute harmonics. This love of physics applications, coupled with a desire to fight climate change, has led me to work towards a career in renewable energy. Following my undergraduate degree, I hope to pursue either a PhD in physics or graduate study in mechanical or electrical engineering to pursue this career path.
> 
> Given this, the REU at Vanderbilt University would be a dream! In particular, I would love to explore the work of Dr. Greg Walker or Dr. Sharon Weiss. Dr. Walker’s lab sounds fascinating, as DFT is an incredibly interesting approach to me and I would absolutely love to learn everything I can from working in this lab and would be happy to learn anything that would better prepare me before. Also, I have found that I greatly enjoy coding and using computers to solve problems, so I believe that this lab would be a wonderful experience! Dr. Weiss’ projects in nanophotonics are fascinating, although not in photovoltaics, the electronic applications of this research are exciting!
> 
> Although I have not yet joined a research group at my university, I have had significant experience in self-led AP Research and as part of a citizen science research group. Through my own acoustical research on correlations between musician practice habits and flute harmonics, I gained a lot of creative experience and confidence from designing this experiment outside of a laboratory setting, such as finding ways to deal with background noise and normalizing sample loudness. Additionally, through joining NASA’s Backyard Worlds: Planet 9 citizen science project in 2021, I learned to scan through academic literature for specific pieces of information. However, a passion that I have had throughout high school is for sustainable energy alternatives and electronics, and beginning my undergraduate research career in this area would be incredible.
> 
> One aspect of the VINSE REU program that piqued my interest was the ability to apply my class studies in a research context with exciting practical applications, such as studying creative energy solutions. In addition to completing the introductory physics series, PHYS 331 Numerical Techniques for the Sciences I (Python and additional math), math through differential equations and linear algebra, and the introductory chemistry sequence this year, I have experience in self-teaching coding and can pick up programming languages quickly. I would love the opportunity to apply these studies in this fascinating environment!
> 
> I would greatly appreciate this program because although I am a physics major at a university that I love, I am incredibly interested in photovoltaics and electrical engineering research. I am incredibly grateful for the research and class opportunities that I have at UNC, but I would also love the opportunity to learn from the amazing engineering-based research at Vanderbilt University, and I would be incredibly grateful to do this in the lens of sustainable energy or electronics research.

**notes about the essay**: Although I had no formal research experience, I took advantage of the experiences I _did_ have (high school projects, classes, self-taught coding) and painted a story of why they prepared me to _start_ research at this REU. Reading this essay now, I sound so young! My second paragraph particularly has a very entertaining run-on sentence that I think everyone reading this could write better. I'm also not entirely clear on what I was saying in my last paragraph. I think this is very good proof that many REUs are looking for enthusiastic young students with lots of _self-motivation_ and _potential_, rather than experience.


**Yamagata University (summer after sophomore year):**

> As a physics major with much experience working in computational research, I would be absolutely thrilled to expand my horizons to experimental physics in Yamagata City or Yonezawa this summer. I spent last summer working full-time at Vanderbilt Institute of Nanoscale Science and Engineering REU, creating a computational method for studying heat across metal/metal oxide interfaces using molecular dynamics. My project was affiliated with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, and I particularly loved observing the impact of physics research on green projects. Additionally, I had the opportunity to learn about the kinds of nanoscale manipulation and research that are possible, through my own project and through the weekly graduate-led “nanoseminars.” These included presentations in materials, nanophotonics, and photovoltaics, and they piqued my interest in the experimental process of nanoscale research. Given this, the research areas in the Yamagata University REU are perfect: solar cells and light emitting diodes, photonics, and nanomaterials are all areas that I would love to research this summer, especially in an institution known for its work on organic LEDs. In particular, I would be interested in solar cell research.
> 
> My research experience includes the full-time REU this past summer as well as a current research position in a theoretical group studying methods of solving for thermodynamic properties of n-body systems. I believe that my varied research paths are a strength of mine in my undergraduate career: pursuing as many research paths that interest me during my undergrad as possible will prepare me to make a more informed choice when it comes time to pick an area of specialization and pursue a PhD. For this particular internship, I believe that my experiences in different research groups have given me strengths in communication and initiative. I have learned how to conduct literature reviews to find answers to questions on my own, as well as how to form specific questions to communicate with graduate students or my PI. I have also gained hard skills such as various data analysis and computational methods and the ability to pick up coding languages quickly.
> 
> I am pursuing a secondary major in music at my home institution, which is something that brings me a lot of joy. However, it means that I don’t have time to study abroad during the school year, which drew me to this REU. I studied Japanese for 5 years in middle and high school, and have always dreamed of visiting Japan. Additionally, Yamagata University is an incredible research university with so much innovation going on! The ability to spend my summer exploring both a new research focus and the Yamagata Prefecture would be incredible, and I would be honored to have the opportunity.

**notes about the essay**: This particular program did not list individual professors on its website, so I instead identified the area of research (experimental solar cell work) that I was interested in. I drew from my first REU at Vanderbilt by highlighting experiences that I couldn't show on my CV. For example, I talked about taking advantage of weekly seminars to explore my research interests, exhibiting curiosity and self-motivation. I also used my past experience to paint a narrative of why I wanted to do experimental work this summer.  
Although it worked for the director of this program, I think my last paragraph is a little unprofessional. I could have framed it more intentionally about my excitement for gaining an international research perspective, rather than saying I "have always dreamed of visiting Japan." That said, I do think it was a helpful addition to explain to the reader why this summer was my only way to study abroad, and show that I would be equally passionate about research and exploring a new culture during the REU.


**Penn State (summer after junior year):**

> I came into college looking for sustainability research: my first experience was an REU studying heat across metal/metal oxide interfaces using molecular dynamics, as part of a larger effort to create a cleaner method for catalytic cracking. I enjoyed the theory but wanted to also explore experimental research, so my next experience was a PIRE clean energy program in a thin film electrochemistry lab in Yamagata, Japan. When I returned home, I joined a biophysics lab and began characterizing 3D printed microscopes and designing a low cost build-it-yourself molecular printer to attach to the microscopes. I do love how intimately I now know my microscope (her name is Circe, she likes to be difficult but I still love her), but I miss applying my physics theory classes to my research! My interests lie in materials physics, which I have actively sought out research experiences outside of my home university to pursue.
>  
> I am interested in two sides of materials research at Penn State. On the experimental side, the Kenneth Knappenberger group is very interesting to me! While in Yamagata, I met a biology professor studying photosynthesis who got me thinking about light-matter interactions from a new lens. Between the fluorescence microscopy in my current research to learning about photosynthesis, femtosecond physics, and nonlinear optics on my own, I’ve learned that there are so many fascinating facets of light-matter interactions! I would absolutely love the chance to learn about any of the experimental techniques that the Knappenberger group is pioneering this summer. On the computational side, I am interested in the work of Vincent Crespi, Zhen Bi, and Long-Qing Chen. I investigated solid state systems using molecular dynamics during my first REU, and was always fascinated and pretty lost to hear my graduate student advisor talk about his own work in DFT. With two more years of physics theory under my belt, I’d love to return to computational materials physics and get a shot at first principles calculations. I miss the theoretical thinking involved in creating simulations, and I would love to engage with some of the fascinating computational research going on at Penn State!
> 
> Along my research journey, I’ve picked up many skills that have prepared me well for an experience like this REU: I have learned to take initiative, organize my thoughts in a lab notebook, and use group meetings as a tool to keep myself in check. I have learned to ask and answer my own questions in many different contexts through literature review, as well as the importance of communicating questions with graduate students or my PI. I’ve gained hard skills like data analysis, computational methods, computer-aided design, and various electrochemistry lab instruments and have learned to come in each morning and write a to-do list for the day that will fit into a larger, months-long project. All of this gives me a solid foundation to build a summer-long project at Penn State.
> 
> As I’ve strayed a little bit from the sustainability and thin film research that I came into college wanting to pursue, I believe that the Penn State REU would help me reconcile my research path with a sustainable future. Additionally, the type of materials research that I could pursue at Penn State is wildly different from what I could do at my home university, which I believe would be an invaluable experience for the summer before graduate school. I would be honored to have the opportunity to expand my research horizons one last time in undergrad!

**notes about the essay**: Ohhhhhh, the exclamation points! So many! Don't use exclamation points in your essays! That said, I use a lot of the same techniques I mentioned in the first two essays in this one. I connect my interest in this REU to my past research experience in ways that show I am self-motivated and curious. I also state very explicitly (without complaining) that I cannot do the materials science research I desire at UNC, hence my extensive previous REU experience and why I am applying to work at Penn State rather than UNC.

### recommendation letters

Most summer programs require two recommendation letter writers. Both letter writers should be from research advisors or STEM professors/teachers. The only example I know of an exception is my friend who won a DAAD RISE fellowship; this is a research opportunity in Germany, and she used an advanced German language professor as a letter writer. If you are a freshman, I think it's okay to use a high school teacher as a letter writer, but if possible try to find a teacher from an AP or college STEM class; I used a math teacher from a college class that I dual enrolled in as a high schooler. Try your best to make at least one of your letter writers a college professor at UNC. If you are not a freshman, both letter writers should have PhDs and should know you from college, not high school.

I wrote a section on recommendation letter writers in my applying to grad school guide, and I think the same advice applies here. Check that out if you're interested!

### good luck!

Once you've submitted your applications, put them out of your mind and maybe you'll get a pretty exciting acceptance email a month or two down the line :) In the meantime, it's a good idea to make a backup plan for a lab you can work in at UNC over the summer if the other summer programs don't work out. And don't neglect applying for a SURF in favor of REUs, both are super valuable!

Good luck, I'm rooting for yall!

